Add governance document (#494)
romejs/rome: GOVERNANCE.md

- Publish access to the [`rome` npm package](https://www.npmjs.com/package/rome)
- Domain registrar and DNS access to all `romejs.*` domains
- Administration access to the `romejs.dev` Netlify account
- Ability to decide on moderation decisions
- Access to the `*@romejs.dev` email address

#### Induction

New managers will be added based on a unanimous vote by the existing managers. In the event that someone is unreachable then the decision will be deferred. Discussion and approval will be done in private.

### Owner

Certain parts of the codebase can be owned by one or more people. This process is informal and inclusion could be a result of substantial contribution or delegation by other members. It's the responsibility of a core contributor to identify the relevant owners and ensure there's an understanding when it comes to code review.

## Current Members

Members listed in alphabetical order.

### Managers

- [Sebastian McKenzie @sebmck](https://github.com/sebmck)

### Core Contributors

- [Eduardo Lopes @EduardoLopes](https://github.com/EduardoLopes)
- [Florent Cailhol @ooflorent](https://github.com/ooflorent)
- [Jamie Kyle @jamiebuilds](https://github.com/jamiebuilds)

> - [Kevin Kelbie](https://github.com/KevinKelbie)

Reviewer: I recently renamed my GitHub
```suggestion
- [Kevin Kelbie](https://github.com/Kelbie)
```

- Push access to the [Rome GitHub org](https://github.com/romejs), this includes all repos
- Contributor status on the [Rome Discord server](https://github.com/romejs)
- Ability to [vote](#voting) on project decisions

There are no expectations around activity once someone becomes a core contributor. Inactive contributors may have voting rights removed however will always retain their status. Inactivity requirements will be specified in a later governance change.

#### Induction

Core contributors may either be nominated by another core contributor or can be self nominated. This can be done via message in the [`#contributors` Discord channel](https://discord.com/channels/678763474494423051/678763474930761739) or by privately messaging a director.

New core contributors will be decided based on a [vote](#voting) conducted in the [`#contributors-private` Discord channel](https://discord.com/channels/678763474494423051/712849311985041420).

In the event of a rejection the nominated person will be privately given the requirements they have not met. Details of the discussion such as the names of those who objected will not be disclosed.

> ### Director

Reviewer 2: Is there a reason to use the term "Director" rather than the classical "Technical Steering Committee"?

Usually in a foundation setting "Director" has a specific meaning which includes accepting certain legal and financial risk associated with fiduciary duty. This feedback is a bit pedantic and can be ignored... but definitely interested in the though process here.

Author: I don't expect there to be more than three "directors" so calling it a committee I think carries more weight. I am not super opinionated on the terminology, previously I used "manager" but I think that carries the wrong connotations and can be demeaning.

In practice I expect the distinction between director and contributor to only be relevant because one has publishing rights (something we can also change in the future).

I would consider the additional "powers" that a director has such as setting high-level project goals and veto ability to be really rare and only a last resort. I really don't anticipate it having to be used at all but having it gives the project more accountability.

Reviewer 2: What about "Steward"

> (of an official) supervise arrangements or keep order at (a large public event).

Author: I like it!

A [vote](#voting) will be conducted with core contributors to gauge general sentiment, however final decision will be reserved to the existing stewards.

### Owner

Certain parts of the codebase can be owned by one or more people. This process is informal and inclusion could be a result of substantial contribution or delegation by other members. It's the responsibility of a core contributor to identify the relevant owners and ensure there's an understanding when it comes to code review.

## Current Members

Members listed in alphabetical order.

### Stewards

- [Sebastian McKenzie @sebmck](https://github.com/sebmck)

### Core Contributors

- [Eduardo Lopes @EduardoLopes](https://github.com/EduardoLopes)
- [Florent Cailhol @ooflorent](https://github.com/ooflorent)
- [Jamie Kyle @jamiebuilds](https://github.com/jamiebuilds)
- [Kevin Kelbie @Kelbie](https://github.com/Kelbie)
- [Olivier Dusabimana @diokey](https://github.com/diokey)
- [Paul Bouchon @bitpshr](https://github.com/bitpshr)
- [Victor Hom @VictorHom](https://github.com/VictorHom)

> 

Reviewer 3: Adding on @yassere to the list when you have the time @sebmck

- If you are adding a new feature then ensure that it has been discussed or approved on GitHub or Discord.
- If necessary, identify potential owners for PR review and approval.
- All code needs to go through Pull Requests (PR) and must pass status checks before being merged. If a PR is merged that breaks `master` due to the branch not being up to date, then it should either be reverted or a quick fix merged as a separate PR.
- If a PR is against code that you have previously committed and is either small changes, bug fixes, or refactors, then you're free to merge it without any review. However if you don't feel confident in your changes then you can wait for approval from another core contributor.

## Moderation

Outlined below is the process for Code of Conduct violation reviews.

### Reporting

Anyone may report a violation. Violations can be reported in the following ways:

- In private, via <conduct@romejs.dev> which is listed in the [Code of Conduct](./CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md). This email address is monitored by all directors.

> - In private, via email to one or more dcirectors.

Reviewer 4: Small typo: dcirectors -> directors

- In private, via direct message to a project director on Discord
- In public, via a GitHub comment (mentioning `@romejs/directors`).
- In public, via the project Discord server.

### Who gets involved?

Each report will be assigned reviewers. These will initially be all project [directors](#directors).

In the event of any conflict of interest - ie. directors who are personally connected to a situation, they must immediately recuse themselves.

> At request of the reporter and if deemed appropriate by the reviwers, another neutral third-party may be involved in the review and decision process.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
At request of the reporter and if deemed appropriate by the reviewers, another neutral third-party may be involved in the review and decision process.
```

> At request of the reporter and if deemed appropriate by the reviwers, another netural third-party may be involved in the review and decision process.

Reviewer 4: netural -> neutral

# Governance

This document outlines the governance model for Rome. This includes the contributor model, code review, merging, and the consequences and process for Code of Conduct violations.

## Member Roles

All members must follow the [Code of Conduct](CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md). Consequences for member violations are detailed in [Moderation](#moderation).

### Core Contributor

> Core Contributors are those who have a history of consistent contributions, whether this pull requests, project management, or support.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Core Contributors include anyone with a history of consistent contributions, including but not limited to pull requests, project management, or support.
```

Reviewer 6: Should this section have a list of privileges like the Managers section?

Author: Good idea. I think we cover it in the "code review and merging" section but it would definitely be useful to reiterate in a summary form.

There are no expectations around activity. There may be a time where contributor privileges are restricted or removed for inactivity. Once core contributor status has been granted you will not lose org membership.

> New contributors will be decided based on a unanimous vote by the existing core contributors.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
New core contributors will be added based on a unanimous vote by the existing core contributors.
```

> New core contributors will be added based on a unanimous vote by the existing core contributors.

Reviewer 2: If you are planning a unanimous vote here you might want to switch to consensus seeking... e.g. set time frame and no objections. Requiring a vote with all members having to vote can create serious friction if even a single person is not available. If the intent is "no objections" framing it that was might be more appropriate.

Also, would you be open to self nomination?

### Manager

> A manager has additional privileges over a core contributor. They serve to control and maintain sensitive project assets, and to act as tiebreakers in the event of disagreements. These additional privileges include:

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
Managers have additional privileges over core contributors. Managers control and maintain sensitive project assets, and act as tiebreakers in the event of disagreements. These additional privileges include:
```

> An manager has additional privileges over a core contributor. They serve to control and maintain sensitive project assets, and to act as tiebreakers in the event of disagreements. These additional privileges include:

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
A manager has additional privileges over a core contributor. They serve to control and maintain sensitive project assets, and to act as tiebreakers in the event of disagreements. These additional privileges include:
```

- Access to the [@romejsdev Twitter account](https://twitter.com/romejsdev)
- Administration privileges on the [Rome GitHub org](https://github.com/romejs)
- Administration privileges on the [Rome Discord server](https://github.com/romejs)
- Publish access to the [`rome` npm package](https://www.npmjs.com/package/rome)
- Domain registrar and DNS access to all `romejs.*` domains
- Administration access to the `romejs.dev` Netlify account
- Ability to decide on moderation decisions involving core contributors
- Access to the `*@romejs.dev` email address

> New managers will be decided based on a unanimous vote by the existing managers.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
New managers will be added based on a unanimous vote by the existing managers.
```

> New managers will be added based on a unanimous vote by the existing managers.

Reviewer 2: Sam as above regarding unanimous vote vs. consensus seeking. But in this case, since there are likely very few managers, it may not be an issue. Although a manager being out on vacation or leave could in theory completely block this process based on current goernance.

### Owner

Certain parts of the codebase can be owned by one or more people. This process is informal and inclusion could be a result of substantial contribution or delegation by other members. It's the responsibility of a core contributor to identify the relevant owners and ensure there's an understanding when it comes to code review.

## Current Members

Members listed in alphabetical order.

### Managers

- [Sebastian McKenzie @sebmck](https://github.com/sebmck)

### Core Contributors

- [Eduardo Lopes @EduardoLopes](https://github.com/EduardoLopes)
- [Florent Cailhol @ooflorent](https://github.com/ooflorent)
- [Jamie Kyle @jamiebuilds](https://github.com/jamiebuilds)
- [Kevin Kelbie](https://github.com/KevinKelbie)
- [Olivier Dusabimana @diokey](https://github.com/diokey)
- [Paul Bouchon @bitpshr](https://github.com/bitpshr)
- [Victor Hom @VictorHom](https://github.com/VictorHom)

> ## Code review and merging

Reviewer 6: Consider splitting this into two different sections, one for guidelines to submitting PRs and one for guidelines to merging.

Author: Good idea!

- All code needs to go through Pull Requests (PR) and must pass status checks before being merged. If a PR is merged that breaks `master` due to the branch not being up to date, then it should either be reverted or a quick fix merged as a separate PR.

> - If a PR is against code that you have previously committed and is either small changes, bug fixes, or refactors, then you're free to merge it without any review. However if you don't feel confident in your changes then you can wait for approval from another core contributor.

Reviewer 2: I can see why you want to have this here but I very much am not a fan of not requiring review. Even a single reviewer help ensure that there is buyin and folks are not just pushing code that has 0 consensus around it

Author: > However if you don't feel confident in your changes then you can wait for approval from another core contributor.

I don't think it's that bad. It places the responsibility on the core contributors. Publishing is performed by a manager so there isn't an opportunity for code to sneak into a release.

The only downside I can see is if things get reverted, and then the risk is placed on the core contributor who has potentially wasted their time, or needs to commit more. I think it will balance itself out.

We can always add more restrictions as the project matures.

- If you are an owner of a particular area you are free to merge it without any review despite PR size.
- If after a PR is merged and there are comments or suggestions after the fact, allow yourself time to address them in a follow up PR. If you don't think you will be able to respond in a reasonable timeframe then create an issue to track.

> - If necessary, identity potential owners for PR review and approval.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
- If necessary, identify potential owners for PR review and approval.
```

- Ensure that PR summary is detailed listing steps you took to verify, the rationale, and relevant issues and people involved in any prior discussion.
- Ensure that PRs contain adequate tests and code comments for a future contributor to derive intent and modify the code safely.

> - You are welcome to use the `rome` repo for your WIP branches. However you should prefix branches with your username. ie. `git branch sebmck/feature`. Branches not involved in an active PR will be regularly pruned.

Reviewer 8: When a PR is opened from a fork, the username is prepended to the name of the branch `USERNAME:feature/my-awesome-feature`. Should this rule applied to these cases too? e.g. `ematipico:ematipico/feature/my-awesome-feature`

Author: I don't think so. The only real reason for prepending the username is so we can easily tell from looking at the branch names who is responsible.

- If you are adding a new feature then ensure that it has been discussed or approved on GitHub or Discord.

## Moderation

Users found to be in violation of the projects [Code of Conduct](./CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md) will be:

- Banned from the GitHub org and Discord server
- Have their contributor status revoked (if applicable)
- Have manager privileges revoked (if applicable)
- Action listed in [`MODERATION.md`](./MODERATION.md). There may be some scenarios where discretion is required and some details omitted to protect and individual's privacy.

This is a one-strike policy.

> Code of Conduct violations can be reported to <conduct@romejs.dev> which is listed in the [Code of Conduct](./CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md). This email address is monitored by managers. Alternatively email addresses for each manager is included in the Code of Conduct for private disclosements in the event of a report involving an manager.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
Code of Conduct violations can be reported to <conduct@romejs.dev> which is listed in the [Code of Conduct](./CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md). This email address is monitored by managers. Alternatively email addresses for each manager is included in the Code of Conduct for private disclosements in the event of a report involving a manager.
```

> Moderation decisions and Code of Conduct violations will be reviewed by the managers in private. If a violation involves an manager then it will be decided amongst the remaining managers. Review can be delegated to core contributors.

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
Moderation decisions and Code of Conduct violations will be reviewed by the managers in private. If a violation involves a manager then it will be decided amongst the remaining managers. Review can be delegated to core contributors.
```

## OpenCollective fund allocation

> - Usage of funds has yet to be decided.

Reviewer 2: Do you have things you definitely don't want to use it for? Might be good spelling out anti-goals early

## Governance changes

> - Future changes to this document will require approval from all core contributors.

Reviewer 2: Above you mention voting, here you state approval. I think it would be a good idea to pick a consensus model and document it. For changes to governance it is usually good to have a slightly larger timebox for changes.

# Governance

This document outlines the governance model for Rome. This includes the contributor model, code review, merging, and the consequences and process for code of conduct violations.

## Member Roles

> All members must follow the [code of conduct](./CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md). Consequences for member violations are detailed in [Moderation](#moderation).

Reviewer 9: "Code of Conduct"?

### Core Contributor

> Core Contributors are those who have proved themselves as an active contributor by being involved in project management or by submitting high quality pull requests.

Reviewer 9: "proving themselves" sounds intimidating. Maybe "are those who have been an active contributor for a long period of time by being involved in project management or by submitting high quality pull requests."

You can also specify the period of time directly, like "one month" or "six months" or "two days".

Author: It’s hard to quantify because there’s multiple variables: the contribution size, scope, project progress, frequency, and time. Maybe it’s worth being more vague since there needs to be a consensus amongst core contributors which essentially makes it a moving target anyway. Although even then it has the aura of “secret club”. It’s tricky.

Reviewer 9: I think specifying them as minimums is a good idea then.

> There are no expectations around activity. There may be a time where contributor privileges are restricted or removed for inactivity. However you will not lose org membership.

Reviewer 9: Maybe clarify "once core contributor status is granted […]"

Also: "a time when"?

> New contributors will be decided based on a general consensus by the existing core contributors.

Reviewer 9: Majority vote? Unanimous vote?

Author: General consensus generally just means "hey is this good" "ok nobody has object for 2 days let's do it". I can clarify

### Admin

> The amount of admins will be kept deliberately small. An admin has additional privileges over a core contributor including:

Reviewer 9: Why

- Access to the `*@romejs.dev` email address

The separation of Core Contributor and Admin allows for a minimum access of privileges.

New admins will be decided based on a general consensus by the existing admins.

### Owners

Certain parts of the codebase can be owned by one or more people. This process is informal and inclusion could be a result of substantial contribution or delegation by other members. It's the responsibility of a core contributor to identify the relevant owners and ensure there's an understanding when it comes to code review.

## Current Members

Members listed in alphabetical order.

### Admins

- [Sebastian McKenzie @sebmck](https://github.com/sebmck)

### Core Contributors

- [Eduardo Lopes @EduardoLopes](https://github.com/EduardoLopes)
- [Florent Cailhol @ooflorent](https://github.com/ooflorent)
- [Jamie Kyle @jamiebuilds](https://github.com/jamiebuilds)
- [Kevin Kelbie](https://github.com/KevinKelbie)
- [Olivier Dusabimana @diokey](https://github.com/diokey)
- [Paul Bouchon @bitpshr](https://github.com/bitpshr)
- [Victor Hom @VictorHom](https://github.com/VictorHom)

## Code review and merging

> - All code needs to go through pull requests and must pass status checks before being merged. If a PR is merged that breaks `master` due to the branch not being up to date, then it should either be reverted or a quick fix merged as a separate PR.

Reviewer 9: "through Pull Requests (PR)" – you are later using an abbreviation so gotta introduce it.

Author: Fancy. I like it.

> - If a PR is against code that you have previously committed and is either small changes, bug fixes, or refactors, then you're free to merge it without any review. However if you don't feel confident in your changes then wait for approval from another core contributor.

Reviewer 9: "then wait" -> "you can wait"

> - If you are an owner of a particular area you are free to merge it without any review despite PR size.

Reviewer 9: wowza, that's a lot of power. Should this include some level of testing as a minimum requirement?

Author: It can be suggested but I want to minimize hard requirements. Stigma and responsibility should balance it out. I'll expand on it. Thanks for the suggestion!

> - If an area involves multiple owners then it's up to .

Reviewer 9: * "up to cpojer to act as a tie breaker" or whatever else you wanted to write here.

Author: Meant to delete this since it's covered in the Owners section.

- If after a PR is merged and there are comments or suggestions after the fact, allow yourself time to address them in a follow up PR. If you don't think you will be able to respond in a reasonable timeframe then create an issue to track.
- You are welcome to use the `rome` repo for your WIP branches. However you should prefix branches with your username. ie. `git branch sebmck/feature`. Branches not involved in an active PR will be regularly pruned.
- If you are adding a new feature then ensure that it has been discussed or approved on GitHub or Discord.

## Moderation

> Users found to be in violation of the projects [code of conduct](./CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md) will be:

Reviewer 9: Is this a one-strike policy?

Author: I don't know how to categorize code of conduct violations without minimizing violations. The wording here could definitely be better but I'm not sure how to allow discretion while properly conveying the gravity. Do you know how other projects do it?

- Banned from the GitHub org and Discord server
- Have their contributor status revoked (if applicable)
- Have admin privileges revoked (if applicable)

> - Action listed in [`MODERATION.md`](./MODERATION.md). There may be some scenarios where discretion is required and some details omitted to protect individuals.

Reviewer 9: "protect individuals" or "protect and individual's privacy"?

> Code of conduct violations can be reported to <conduct@romejs.dev> which is listed in the [code of conduct](./CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md). This email address is monitored by admins.

Reviewer 9: The other doc made me think that it goes to "community leaders" that are separate from the admins. It may make sense to clarify that there. Also, bummer, because if I think an admin violated the CoC and this email goes out to all admins I don't really get protection as the person in question will also see my complaint and that it's coming from me. This may intimidate members from the community to report possible violations.

Author: Yeah I raised that in [this comment](https://github.com/romejs/rome/pull/494#issuecomment-631871747). Other projects have this flaw but don't even acknowledge it nor have any thorough governance documentation.

Alternatively the Admins section can list emails of the admins to allow for disclosure to specific people. Also important to note that I don't see the project ever exceeding 3-4 admins.

Author: I've made an update to include a list of admin contacts and clarification in the Code of Conduct intro.
